(WIP) Feature: Add guided example for reusable pipelines (osft-minimal) (#31)
red-hat-data-services/red-hat-ai-examples: examples/fine-tuning/rhoai-3.3/pipelines/training-hub/osft-minimal/README.md

Reviewer: Shall we have only 2 guided examples: one for SFT and one for OSFT, where we would point at full and minimal ones and describe the difference? This way we don't duplicate the information and probably would be easier for users. I don't have a strong opinion though

# OSFT Continual Learning Pipeline on Red Hat OpenShift AI (RHOAI)

This example provides an overview of the OSFT algorithm and an example on how to use it with Red Hat OpenShift AI pipelines.

Our example will go through: dataset download, training on a single node with GPU, evaluation of the fine-tuned model, and registering the model to Model Registry.

## Note

This example is compatible with RHOAI version 3.3

## OSFT Overview

> Fine-tuning language models is hard—you need good data, lots of resources, and even small changes can cause problems. This makes it tough to add new abilities to a model. This problem is called continual learning and is what our new training technique, orthogonal subspace fine-tuning (OSFT), solves.

Reviewer 2: Maybe here we can just do: 
to learn more about OSFT - see <link to training hub>

> The OSFT algorithm implements Orthogonal Subspace Fine-Tuning based on Nayak et al. (2025), arXiv:2504.07097. This algorithm allows for continual training of pre-trained or instruction-tuned models without the need of a supplementary dataset to maintain the distribution of the original model/dataset that was trained.

Reviewer: OSFT algorithm implements Orthogonal Subspace Fine-Tuning? Shall this be 
```suggestion
Orthogonal Subspace Fine-Tuning (OSFT) is a training technique based on Nayak et al. (2025), arXiv:2504.07097. This algorithm allows for continual training of pre-trained or instruction-tuned models without the need of a supplementary dataset to maintain the distribution of the original model/dataset that was trained.
```

Author: Thanks, this is based on https://github.com/Red-Hat-AI-Innovation-Team/training_hub/blob/44b2f82d1bad3564f0e47faaf22841f0dadeeb3b/src/training_hub/algorithms/osft.py#L13

Author: No strong opinion personally on what this should be in our docs tbh so happy to go with your suggestion

    - **Key**:
      - `HF_TOKEN` – a valid Hugging Face access token.

- **oci-pull-secret-model-download (required for private OCI base models)**
    - **Used by**: Training step when `phase_02_train_man_train_model` is an `oci://` reference.
    - **Key**:
      - `OCI_PULL_SECRET_MODEL_DOWNLOAD` – the contents of a Docker `config.json`, used by `skopeo` to
        authenticate to the registry.

## Pipeline Parameters

The OSFT minimal pipeline exposes only the most important parameters and the list can be found in the
[repository readme](https://github.com/red-hat-data-services/pipelines-components/blob/main/pipelines/training/osft_minimal/README.md).

## Quick Start

### 1. Generate the Pipeline YAML

The compiled pipeline YAML is not included in the repository and must be generated locally.

**Requirements:**
- Python 3.11+
- KFP SDK version **2.15.2** (important: other versions may produce incompatible YAML)

```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/kubeflow/pipelines-components.git
cd pipelines-components

# Create a virtual environment with the correct KFP version
python -m venv .venv-kfp
source .venv-kfp/bin/activate

> pip install kfp==2.15.2 kfp-kubernetes==2.15.2

Reviewer: I think we should use uv instead, pipelines components docs also use uv

Author: We could move to uv, to me  pip is more common?

1. Navigate to **Develop & train** > **Pipelines** > **Runs** and click **Create run**

![](./docs/04.png)

2. Set the following
  
    - Experiment - optional - can be left as Default (learn more about how to manage experiments in [official documentation](https://docs.redhat.com/en/documentation/red_hat_openshift_ai_self-managed/3.0/html/working_with_ai_pipelines/managing-pipeline-experiments_ai-pipelines#overview-of-pipeline-experiments_ai-pipelines))
    - Name - required - name of the run
    - Description - optional - description of the run
    - Pipeline - required - select the pipeline name defined in pipeline definition step
    - Pipeline version - required - autoselects latest version

![](./docs/05.png)

3. Scroll down to **Parameters** and set the following required parameter:

    - **phase_01_dataset_man_data_uri** to **LipengCS/Table-GPT:All**

> - Other parameters are optional, ranging from dataset subset size, fine-tuning number of workers, batch size to lm-eval evaluation tasks or
model registry. For the example purpose, model registry has been set up to showcase produced metrics and selected only a subset of the dataset to fine-tune the model on (2000 samples)

> 

Reviewer 2: I think it would be worth adding here something about the model being used. 
Something like 
In this example pipeline run it will default to using the "XYZ" model. Update param "XYZ" to override this.

4. Click **Run**
5. Pipeline run view will appear where steps, logs and a loss chart can be viewed at any point (during or after the run)

- Overall view:

![](./docs/06.png)

- Logs, inputs or outputs, task details or visualization can be viewed by clicking on a step icon and navigating to the required tab

![](./docs/07.png)

- Training loss chart - training component provides a loss chart, which can be viewed by clicking on the **output_loss_chart** icon and
navigating to **Visualization**

> - Note: The chart can be viewed in full screen from the **Artifact details** S3 link

![](./docs/08.png)

- Completed pipeline

![](./docs/09.png)

> Each pipeline step is performed as a separate Kubernetes pod. Pods can be investigated for further details if required.

Reviewer 2: I think it might be worth adding a bit more detail about what happened in the pipeline run in each distinct stage.
The training stage in particular, with mention of the TrainJob CR being created and subsequent Training Pods.

### 5. Model Registry

1. To view model registered in model registry navigate to **AI hub** > **Registry**

![](./docs/10.png)

2. Select the model and navigate to **Versions**, from where you can select your fine-tuned model version and view

> metrics in **Details**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
metrics under **Details** tab
```

> - Note: Version, model name, and registry address are all part of exposed optional parameters in the pipeline.
> - Note: The amount of metrics varies based on the number of evaluation tasks selected; by default, evaluation performs only the arc_easy task.

> ![](./docs/11.png)

Reviewer 2: Could we add a next steps section with image on how to serve the model. 

Also, link to the full OSFT and SFT pipelines with an explanation on why you might want to use those - not just for the extra params but also to control resources etc.
